##### <p align="center"><em>***** This blog post is part of the series on *****<br><strong>How Javascript runs behind the scenes</strong></em></p>
##### <p align="center"><em>Originally Published at</em> [https://dev.to/ujalak1812](https://dev.to/ujalak1812/part-4-all-about-the-execution-context-nhn)

# Part 4: All about the Execution Context itself

Up until this point, our focus was on the execution stack i.e. the execution contexts stacked on one another. Lets now talk about the execution context itself but without defining it again this time 😅

## So, What does an execution context contain?

An execution context can be associated with an object for example, in case of a browser, we always associate the global execution context with the window object.
The object has three properties:

1. ***the variable object***, which itself is an object that contains the function arguments, variable declarations and function declarations
2. ***the scope chain***, which contains the current variable object as well as the variable objects of all its parents
3. ***"this" variable***, that is associated with the current execution context

## How an execution context is exactly formed?

We already know that when a function is called, a new execution context is put on top of the execution stack, This happens in two phases:

- The creation phase
- The execution phase 

### 1. The Creation Phase
This phase is completed in three steps

1.  #### Creation of the Variable object

  - First, The argument object is created, which contains all the arguments that were passed into the function.
  - Next, all the Functions and variables are ***hoisted*** so that they are available before the execution phase starts. This hoisting happens in two steps
    - The code is scanned for function declarations and for each function, a property is created in the variable object pointing to that function. In this way, all the functions will be stored inside the variable object, even before the code starts executing.
    - The code is scanned for variable declarations, and for each variable, a property is created in the variable object and is set to "undefined"


2. #### Creation of the scope chain
    For every execution context, its scope chain is created. The scope chain defines which variable objects the current execution context will have access to other than its own. Each execution context has access to the variable objects of its parent and ancestors' execution contexts up to the global scope. (lexical scoping)


 3. #### The "this" variable is determined and set.
    Every execution context gets its own this variable that is only created as soon as the respective function is invoked. The "this" variable points to the variable object of the current execution context

### 2. The Execution Phase 
<p>
    This is the second phase. In this phase, all the variables are defined and the code of the function that generated the current execution context is run line by line.
</p>
    
This is what exactly happens when a function is called in Javascript and this is how an execution context is formed and is placed on top of the execution stack.

I hope all the previous parts now make more sense.

You may leave your queries and suggestions below after reading (if any). 😊

